# Methylation Signatures Resource

This is a resource to collect methylation signatures generated by various
methods.

**Definition**: A *methylation signature* is a set of genomic loci, often
representing regions of interest related to biologically meaningful
features.

Examples of methylation signatures include:

- Differentially methylated regions (DMRs) between disease states or tissue
types which could serve as features in a classifier.
- Regions where the level of methylation is correlated with the presence
or absence of a specific tissue type or disease state.

Methylation signatures can be defined as tab-delimited text files similar to
[BED files](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1) but
with an arbitrary number of custom annotation columns in any order.

Required columns:
- **chrom** - name of the chromosome
- **chromStart** - starting position
- **chromEnd** - ending position

## Guidelines for adding new methylation signatures

Our aim is to standardize as much as possible the formatting of new
signatures added to this repository so that these signatures can be
easily integrated into bioinformatics pipelines. Once a pipeline
is designed to run on one signature, it should ideally be able to
accept any other signature in place.

1. Each signature should exist in its own directory, with one signature
file per directory.
2. Signature files should be tab-delimited with the extension .tsv using
the above convention for the first three columns, and additional columns
of choice. See the existing signatures as examples.
3. Use version control to track any changes in the signatures over time.
Consider tagging key versions, for example those used in publicly available
pipeline code or publications.
4. For signatures exceeding a few megabytes in size, please speak
with Eric Zhao or another repository administrator to discuss whether
an alternative means of storage is preferable, so as not to overburden
the version control system.
5. Document all new signatures thoroughly in the README.md file under
the signature's directory.
6. Optionally, you may include reproducible code used to generate the
signature for added context on decisions/assumptions which were made.
This is strongly encouraged where feasible.

## Recommended documentation details

Key pieces of documentation ought to be included to provide crucial context.

1. **Author**: Author of the signature, and contact information/github handle.
Note that other users may choose to reach out if they have any questions or comments.
2. **Intended purpose**: What problem was this signature created to solve?
3. **Process of creation**: What was the process used to create this signature?
Be specific about any sources of data, technology platforms these data were
generated with, disease/tissue types, etc.
4. **Annotations**: The datatype, format, and meanings of any optional
annotation columns that were included in the signature TSV file.
5. **Publications**: Include citations of any publications this signature was
used in, or derived from.

Of course, any additional documentation details are welcome. Please be as
inclusive as possible of any information that could be useful in the reuse
of your methylation signature.

## Getting help or suggesting features

Please use the Github Issues feature to track any queries or suggestions.
